Section : the ghosts of war <p> An autumn chill settled grey and dreary over he harbor as water churned between the U.S.S. Leonard Wood and its ratty old pier . New York City 's spires jutted from misty shrouds as wind sliced into the matching cap and coat Mom had bundled me in that morning . Then , while our ocean liner 's bow cut through the bay , gulls circling its stern screeched warily at a blast from the ship 's horn . Looking back , it was a lonely , ominous sound . <p> Our first night out , the ship plunged through foaming Atlantic swells that sent Mom to bed with what she called " terminal mal de mer , " but dawn broke on a tranquil ocean and balmy skies . After entering the Panama Canal , my father , a U.S. Army doctor with orders to the Philippines , took us on a shopping spree in Cristobal . I got a toy gun , and Mom picked a Chinese rug from a rack that soared to the shop 's ceiling like in the rug around a wooden peg then had it stowed in our cabin ; but when the sun struck our porthole just right , I would peel back its fringes and the deep blue nap glistened as if it had been kissed by a morning dew . At last it was unrolled in our new house on a sunny street bordering the parade ground , two blocks from Wheeler Field , but I digress . <p> While the Leonard Wood 's wake melted into a slate green Pacific , its wireless operator translated the dashes and dots of a communique to my father from the War Department . Did we know it was a reprieve , a call from the governor 's office to our executioner ? Not then , but our destination had been changed from Manila to Honolulu , Hawaii . If that spinning ball had n't dropped into just the right slot , my children would never have been born . <p> What followed our arrival in Hawaii were breezes perfumed by fragrant tropical flowers , tasty avocados falling from a tree in our front yard , and read to me from A. A. Milne 's Pooh Bear series , and I would tag along some golf course with my father and Maxy . <p> We still had horse soldiers in those days . Major Maxy Noble , a West Pointer , cavalry officer , and my father 's best friend , would drop by our house for " one " beer , then he and Dad would spend lazy afternoons in the backyard , swapping lies and cussing Franklin Delano Roosevelt . But every time he knocked on our lanai 's screen door , Maxy gleamed and glittered . A saber dangled from his left hip and silver spurs spun on cavalry boots that held a spit-shine like I 've never seen since . A Sam Browne belt 's diagonal strap ran across his chest to disappear under a khaki epaulet . But mostly it was the hat . Its leather noose rose jauntily from just below his dimple , hugging square jaws up to a wide brim with a dome circled by gold braid and tassels on its front . Shazzam ! He was Captain Marvel , <p> A pat on the head from this swashbuckler would be enough for most pre-TV preschoolers , but it got better , much better . I told you there was a parade ground across our street . The U.S. Cavalry drilled there ; twice a month Maxy would lead three columns of mounted , steely-eyed soldiers to " troop the line . " Awestruck , I squatted on a curb with the neighborhood kids , waiting for him to spur his steed toward us , then with practiced dexterity he 'd reach down and I 'd vault into space . Straddling his charger I 'd clasp that Sam Browne belt while we cantered to a reviewing stand amid pennants popping in tropical breezes . A metallic whisper of steel and sunlight glinting on his saber was a prelude to his crisp command , " Eyyyes , RIGHT ! " His blade would flash , tip freezing at a perfect forty-five-degree angle to the ground quivering with hoofbeats , and every head in the trailing columns snapped right . After the last trooper cleared the reviewing stand , Maxy would wheel his me to the peanut gallery . His horse would slow when we approached my pals , and Maxy would lower me into a sprint , usually resulting in an end-over-end tumble . But I 'd rise like a victorious phoenix ; these kids were now my troopers ! <p> Then the long shadow fell across my world : Maxy and his band were ordered to Manila . I wept when he left because the elegance of our island dissolved like wisps of rising smoke . Even though other people inhabited my life , Maxy Noble was gone . <p> Under the avocado tree , if I faced our front door , the Momms lived on our left . Captain Momm , a signal officer , was built like a tank : short , wide , and with a nose like a cannon . His wife Anna , lithe and stately , saw darker visions that I yet understood . My mother said her parents were white Russians and that during the revolution there a Red Army firing squad had forced her to watch their execution . No wonder her smile seemed to our right . I do n't remember his name or rank , but she and her daughter have tugged at my memory for six decades . Jewell and Billie Jewell . On weekends , if I got up early enough , Jewell Walker served fluffy pancakes or magic waffles , dripping in Log Cabin syrup , with crispy bacon as an extra . Sometimes Billie Jewell -- a worldly , older woman of twelve , with glowing cheeks and honey-colored hair -- would attend . I adored her . <p> A couple of months after Maxy sailed , Miz Walker took me to a circus and , when we got home , Adams was there ; that meant my parents were going out . Adams was an orderly at my father 's dispensary and had this marvelous scar on the back of his right hand where a tattoo had been removed . As my parents drove away in our grey 1938 Olds , a swooping fighter plane rattled the rafters -- no rare occurrence , since our house had been built in Wheeler Field 's flight path . Adams fed , and was telling me about his scar for the zillionth time as I fell asleep , not knowing or caring that the next day 's dawn would change history . <p> BOOM ! When I leapt from bed , sunshine sparkled n rattling panes . BOOM ! BOOM ! BOOM ! " Pat ! " Mom screamed . " Did a plane hit the house ? " <p> My father looked out the bathroom window . " Plane hell , " he yelled . " It 's the god-damned Japs ! " <p> By this time , I was in Mom 's bed . " Everybody downstairs , " Dad ordered . " Hurry ! " Our stairwell featured a tall window facing Wheeler Field , where the Army Air Corps had fighter squadrons . " They 'll make short work of these bastards , " Dad snarled . But as we clattered down our stairs , the window , sill to sill and side to side , showed only billowing black smoke lined with flashes of orange . Dad pushed us into an alcove under the stairs , tried radio . An announcer 's excited voice confirmed that Hickam and Wheeler Fields were under attack , as was Pearl Harbor . When Dad returned to the stairwell , he wore a braided cap . " There 'll be a lot of wounded boys , Helen . " <p> " You ca n't leave ! " Mom wailed . But he did . On foot . Dodging and weaving between buildings all the way to the hospital -- if he 'd taken our Olds , Japanese bullets would have riddled him . Minutes later , Jewell and Billie Jewell bounded across the backyard and pounded on our kitchen door . Mom let them in , then calmly set her coffee pot on a burner to heat . <p> The bombs were closer now . And louder . They really whistle on the way down , you know , and their explosions rattled our house like earthquakes . The radio reported that ships were blazing in the harbor and columns of smoke were drifting over the airfields . Then suddenly our lanai door banged and Anna Momm , eyes flashing like a When she yanked our couch away from the wall and scrambled behind it on all fours , Mom shrugged , then Jewell followed her into the kitchen . Billie Jewell was crying in the alcove under the stairs when I jumped onto the couch and peeked over its back ; Anna was curled up , sobbing and shaking so hard I was afraid she 'd shatter . <p> As I ran for the kitchen to tell Mom , the roar of a plane shook our walls ; she was carrying her coffee pot .... The howling engine became chattering machine gunfire ! A window over our sink exploded into spraying glass and wood , knocking the pot from her hand and slamming it against a wall as Jewell 's screams ricocheted through the plane 's exhaust fumes . <p> The rest of the morning we huddled in our living room , listening to a radio tell us to boil the water we cooked with or drank , and reporting death and casualty counts . Bombs still whistled , sometimes closer , sometimes more distant . A house up the street was desperate moans from behind the couch . With childish bravado , I found my toy gun which fired small corks , then watched patiently from a window for planes emblazoned with red circles , but my corks would n't reach . If only Maxy .... <p> That afternoon my father returned with two gas masks -- I spied them when he walked in . They were grotesque : bluish-grey rubber with black hoses and round glass eyes staring vacantly . He was trying to fit one on me when Mom asked how he 'd gotten them . He said they had belonged to soldiers who had been killed that morning . Blood pounding , I fled , but he told Mom to do it because there could be an invasion that night . When he returned to the dispensary I wondered if I 'd ever see this aloof , pensive man again . <p> Fouled by smoke and flame , twilight glimmered across my tropical paradise while large army trucks , covered from cab to tailgate by arched brown canvas , lumbered down our street . They stopped for grim-jawed military block , and when our time came an MP lifted me into the truck ; shadowy specters loomed under its canvas so I snuggled next to the cab , shivering against its cool metal . Finally , at the main thoroughfare , our truck joined a convoy and the MP told us we were being taken to an abandoned schoolhouse in the mountains . It was dark now , and after awhile I noticed a strange orange flicker on the canvas , then a wisp of wind caught its flap , blowing it back from the cab . In that instant I saw what our priest once described at mass as a flaming hell . <p> Pearl Harbor was on fire ! Dark superstructures swayed gently on a flame-laced tapestry while other vessels , listing severely , had cables running to less damaged ships . That was the United States ' smoldering Pacific fleet ! And the water was burning ! The truck flap dropped quickly but its revealed vision had seared my brain . It is what " Remember Pearl Harbor ! " still means to me . <p> We American clipper for San Francisco . During the flight , I watched two officers with stars gleaming on their shoulders , particularly the one crying . Years later I learned who General Short and Admiral Kimmel were : the army and navy 's ranking Hawaiian officers . Kimmel 's tears must have been about what history now considers the unfair , fingerpointing allegations the men would face at the end of their journey . <p> I 've often wondered about the Momms . Did that aristocratic woman ever recover from two of the twentieth century 's versions of politics run amuck ? And I hope Adams survived to have children who pestered him , as I had , about his scar . I thought about the Walkers -- particularly Billie Jewell . Incredibly , I spotted her in a San Francisco department store and bolted from Mom 's side . She was mad until she saw Jewell . They hugged , then cried , then we took the same taxi and Billie Jewell sang along with the songs on the radio -- she was very sophisticated . They dropped us at Arkansas . I wish I could see them all once again . <p> Mom waited until after the war to disclose Maxy 's fate , and at the risk of political incorrectness , I 'll share it with you . The Imperial Japanese Army captured him when the Philippines fell . He obviously irritated some savage among that infamous horde , because he was lashed to a tree , facing the sun , then his eyelids were sliced off . After he went blind , they cut him down and decapitated him . The bastards . <p> Many of that war 's heros now sleep in eternal repose , but it 's said they once bore witness to the passing of our nation 's innocence . Some gallantly paid the full measure so that my children and your children might see and smell and touch this place and time . Now in night 's nestling silence , I still dream of a tropical sunset with palm trees filtering that last glow of a long forgotten sky . Silver taps , echoed mournfully by a ghostly bugler , drift across a flag-draped crowd to salute Maxy and his comrades all . Then if you listen very , very closely , " Eyyyes , RIGHT ! " whispers from the universe . <p> By Ralph Patterson <p> <p> Ralph Patterson , an attorney from North Little Rock , Arkansas , and a freelance writer , has smelled the gunpowder of courtrooms for over three decades and served three terms in the Arkansas state senate . <p>