Adolescents with Emotional and Behavioral Disorders ( EBD ) present deficits in literacy skills , in part because their disruptive behaviors interfere with task engagement . Antecedent manipulations , such as those based on behavioral momentum theory , can increase students ' contact with reinforcement , leading to greater task engagement . This study examined the effects of a Repeated Reading ( RR ) intervention designed to establish a high-p sequence for two adolescents with EBD . Results indicated that participants ' latency to continue reading decreased after the high-p sequence , and fluency increases presented momentum-like effects as participants read initial portions of novel text . Results are discussed in terms of the adaptability of interventions based on the high-p sequence . # Students identified with Emotional and Behavioral Disorders ( EBD ) demonstrate low academic achievement in reading , in addition to the serious externalizing and/or internalizing behaviors that characterize their disabilities ( Lane &amp; Menzies , 2010 ) . Students with EBD who demonstrate low achievement in reading tend to face poor post-school results , including dropout , unemployment , and incarceration ( Wagner et instruction in classrooms for students with EBD have been noted ( e.g. , Staubitz , Cartledge , Yurick , &amp; Lo , 2005 ; Wehby , Lane , &amp; Falk , 2003 ) , it is also acknowledged that students ' problem behaviors impact the effectiveness of any academic interventions implemented ( McDaniel , Duchaine , &amp; Jolivette , 2010 ) . Students with EBD tend to avoid academic tasks ( Teeple &amp; Skinner , 2004 ) , instead engaging in off-task and disruptive behaviors that subvert teachers ' instructional delivery ( Sutherland , Lewis-Palmer , Stichter , &amp; Morgan , 2008 ) . Teachers , therefore , need methods to help students with EBD initiate and persist in academic tasks ( Lee , 2006 ) . While a variety of interventions may impact students ' involvement with academic tasks ( e.g. , teacher delivery of reinforcers for time-on-task ) , antecedent manipulations that establish a better match between academic tasks and students ' opportunities for reinforcement may be particularly beneficial for students with EBD. # Momentum-Like Effects from High-p ; Sequences # One class of antecedent interventions is based on behaviors persist in a given setting while others do not ( Nevin , Mandell , &amp; Atak , 1983 ) . Behaviors reinforced on a relatively richer schedule tend to have greater momentum when challenged by disruptions in the environment than behaviors reinforced on thinner schedules ( Parry-Cruwys et al. , 2011 ) . For students with EBD , the schedule of reinforcement that maintains academic engagement is often quite thin ( i.e. , students may not experience reinforcement on a regular and frequent basis ) , making it more likely that these students will fail to begin academic tasks or stop responding during them . # In line with this theory , researchers have developed high-probability ( high-p ) sequences as an intervention that can increase students ' contact with reinforcement during academic tasks ( Lee 2006 ; Mace et al . 1988 ) . High-p sequences embed a series of preferred tasks with a high probability of completion and reinforcement ( e.g. , single-digit math problems , Belfiore et al. , 1997 ; independent-level words , Burns et al. , 2009 ) , prior to a task with a ; instructional-level words ) . High-p interventions increase the overall rate of responding within a response class , groups of behaviors that have the same function and result in the same consequences and essentially increase students ' contact with reinforcement during task engagement ( Lee , 2006 ; Mace et al . 1988 ) . # Studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of high-p sequences to increase task engagement by reducing the amount of time it takes students to transition between problems in mathematics ( e.g. , Belfiore et al. , 1997 ; 2002 ; Lee et al . 2004 ; 2006 ; 2012 ) and re-initiate writing in language arts ( Lee &amp; Laspe , 2003 ) . Similarly , high-p sequences have been used in reading . Joseph and Nist ( 2006 ) examined sight word acquisition using high-p sequences ( i.e. , high ratio of known-to-unknown words ) and found that students read more than in the other conditions . Burns and colleagues ( 2009 ) applied a high-p sequence to reading word lists by presenting 20 below-grade-level words before 100 target words in what they called the behavioral participants in the control condition ( i.e. , the 100 target words by themselves ) . These studies suggest that high-p sequences can be used to help students become and stay engaged during independent literacy practice . Research , however , has primarily focused on discrete tasks ( e.g. , reading individual words in lists ) . Contextual reading that represents a continuous task may be fundamentally different from reading discrete words in lists ( Burns et al. , 2009 ; Skinner , 2002 ) . # Vostal and Lee ( 2011 ) did examine the effects of high-p sequences during a continuous reading task . Three secondary students with EBD read a series of paragraphs taken from expository text in both a traditional and high-p format . The traditional format was comprised of paragraphs at participants ' instructional reading level . In the high-p condition , instructional-level and independent-level paragraphs were alternated throughout the reading . Results showed that participants reduced latency to continue reading new paragraphs after high-p paragraphs ( i.e. , reduced latency to initiate tasks is the established measure of behavioral momentum-like effects in free operant tasks , 2012 ) . As important , students demonstrated higher levels of fluency on instructional-level paragraphs after the delivery of the high-p paragraph . Additional research is needed to determine whether other methods of improving oral reading fluency can also establish momentum-like effects between paragraphs . # Purpose # The purpose of the current study was to extend the findings from Vostal and Lee ( 2011 ) by implementing a more externally valid high-p sequence . Because results from that study indicated that reading fluency increases were functionally related to momentum-like effects , the current study examined if an established instructional method , repeated reading ( RR ) , which has been shown to be effective at increasing students ' reading fluency ( Therrien , 2004 ; Wexler et al. , 2008 ) , could produce similar momentum-like effects . In RR , students read a passage several times in order to build fluency . For example , when the goal is for students to improve reading fluency and comprehension on a particular passage , Therrien 's ( 2004 ) meta-analysis found that students need to read that same passage 3-4 , researchers might use this established method as the basis for developing packaged interventions to help students initiate and remain engaged in continuous reading . # To that end , this current study explored two questions : # Does guided oral repeated reading of paragraphs lead to latency reductions between paragraphs compared to passages in which no RR intervention was employed ? Does guided oral repeated reading of contextual paragraphs lead to fluency increases that carry over into initial portions of novel paragraphs ? Method # Participants and Setting # Six students enrolled at an alternative school for students with EBD in a northeastern state were identified by teachers as having reading deficits and displaying academic noncompliance ( i.e. , failure to initiate and completes tasks ) . After they returned parent/guardian permission , they were screened for participation using the oral reading fluency ( ORF ) probes from the Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills ( DIBELS ; Good &amp; Kaminski , 2007 ) . Scoring procedures followed recommendations published in DIBELS . Because all students were in secondary grades ( i.e. , beyond those traditionally measured by DIBELS elementary grade proficiency levels , potential participants were initially screened using fourth grade benchmark passages . Based on their reading of those passages , potential participants read from higher or lower grade levels until their instructional level was determined ( i.e. , 70-100 words correct per minute WCPM , Hosp and Hosp , 2003 ) . Four students demonstrated reading levels greater than sixth grade ( i.e. , the ceiling of the DIBELS measures used in this screening ) and were subsequently included in a different intervention . The two remaining students demonstrated their highest instructional reading levels on fifth grade DIBELS passages and were included in this study . # Jerry was a 13-year-old , white male , enrolled in eighth grade with a median ORF on fifth grade passages of 71 with 98% accuracy . Teachers reported that in addition to his identification with EBD , Jerry was diagnosed with Tourette syndrome ; his observed tics included head movements and throat clearing . Craig was a 14-year-old , white male , enrolled in eighth grade with a median oral reading fluency ( ORF ) on fifth grade passages of had been identified with EBD in elementary school , and had recently received a diagnosis of Pervasive Developmental Delay-Not Otherwise Specified ( PDD-NOS ) by a psychologist . Teachers reported that both students often failed to initiate and complete academic tasks . # Intervention sessions took place in a conference room near the school office . Individual students sat at a table ( approximately 1 m wide by 1.5 m long ) in the center of the room , with the researcher seated across the table . A laptop computer was centered between the student and researcher , and the built-in webcam was used to video record all sessions. # Materials # Students read expository material related to The Great Depression ( for sample passages , see Vostal &amp; Lee , 2011 ) . In that study , selections were modified in order to maintain a consistent level of readability by dividing longer paragraphs into shorter paragraphs , breaking complex sentences into shorter simple sentences , and replacing multisyllabic names with simpler synonyms . Readability of the selections was determined through the Flesch-Kinkaid Grade Level to be between 5.0 and 5.7 level that most fifth grade students could read and comprehend . These fifth grade selections were measured to have a mean readability of 5.48 ( range 5.0-5.7 ) with a mean selection length of 515 words ( SD = 43.6 ) , 51.1 ( SD = 8.7 ) words per paragraph , and 8-10 paragraphs per selection . Because of the expository nature of the material , each paragraph had a separate main idea , all centered on a single topic . Thus , there was no narrative that connected each paragraph to the next ; rather , paragraphs moved in a chronological order . For example , a passage on Franklin Delano Roosevelt started with his early life , moved into his early political career , then his initial presidential term , and concluded with his work through the end of the Depression . Each paragraph was presented on a separate page , requiring participants to turn the page at the end of each paragraph . All paragraphs were typed in 1.5-spaced , 20-point , black Arial font on white paper . # Procedures # Each participant came into the was counterbalanced across sessions . Once a student entered the room , and was seated at the table , the researcher thanked him for coming to read , reminded him he would be recorded throughout the session , clicked the record button on the computer , and blacked out the screen so that the running video was not visible . # Traditional . In the traditional condition ( i.e. , control ) , participants orally read two selections related to The Great Depression written at their instructional level . The initial selection was not measured but used to make session length comparable to intervention sessions during which students engaged in a RR intervention . Total traditional condition sessions lasted an average of 14.79 min ( range 12.65-20.52 min ) , while RR condition sessions lasted an average of 17.58 min ( range 14.25-20.50 min ) . During the traditional condition , participants were presented the initial selection and instructed to orally read as quickly as possible . During participants ' reading , procedures for addressing reading hesitations were taken from Therrien and Kubina ( 2006 ) , who suggested that if during a timed reading , the student should be told the word and that word should be recorded as an error . After completing the initial selection , participants were presented the target selection in which their responses were measured . The researcher reiterated directions to read as quickly as possible . # Repeated reading . In the RR condition , participants were asked to complete an oral repeated reading rehearsal session prior to reading the target selection . Procedures for conducting RR were based on recommendations from Therrien ( 2004 ) and Therrien and Kubina ( 2006 ) . The odd paragraphs ( 1 , 3 , 5 , and 7 ) were removed from the target selection . Participants read these paragraphs three times . Three repeated readings were used because Therrien indicated that if the purpose of RR was to read a particular selection more fluently , then students should read the selection three or four times . Finally , comparable to alternating independent and instructional-level paragraphs ( i.e. , Vostal &amp; Lee , 2011 ) , researchers alternated repeated paragraphs with novel paragraphs ( i.e. , the and final reading . # When the participant began reading , the researcher started the timer and marked any words read incorrectly on a second copy of the passage . Just as the traditional condition , procedures for addressing reading hesitations were taken from Therrien and Kubina ( 2006 ) . Upon participants ' completion of the four-paragraph sequence during each repeated reading , the researcher would announce the duration to complete the reading and read any words that were read incorrectly ; participants then read those words correctly before moving on . As soon as the third reading and feedback was completed , these repeated paragraphs were mixed back into the target selection and placed in front of participants , who were instructed to read the entire target selection as quickly as possible . # Experimental Design and Dependent Variables # The current study of behavioral momentum-like effects during a continuous reading task used a single-case multielement design ( Kennedy , 2005 ) . Two conditions were alternated , and the order of the conditions was randomly determined using a coin flip ( i.e. , heads = Traditional , tails condition could not be presented three times in a row . # Latency . Latency to initiate subsequent paragraphs was the primary dependent variable and was defined as the time between the completion of orally reading the last word of a paragraph ( i.e. , the stimulus to turn the page and continue reading ) and the initiation of the first word in the next paragraph . Belfiore et al . ( 1997 ) established latency as a measure of momentum effects within free operant academic tasks , and it has been used as a common dependent measure in subsequent studies examining interventions based on behavioral momentum ( e.g. , Vostal &amp; Lee , 2011 ; Lee at al. , 2012 ) . # Effect sizes of this primary dependent variable were calculated using non-overlap of all pairs ( NAP ; Parker &amp; Vannest , 2009 ) , a non-parametric effect size calculation for single-case designs . Similar to other overlap quantifications of effect size ( e.g. , percent of non-overlapping data ; PND ) , NAP calculates the percent of non-overlapping data between a baseline and treatment phase . An " a comprehensive test of all treatment data point comparisons , a total of NA NB pairs " ( Parker &amp; Vannest , 2009 , p. 359 ) . That is , in NAP each baseline data point is compared with each treatment data point , assigning one point for an overlap , zero points for non-overlap , and a half point for a match ( i.e. , treatment and baseline data points are the same ) . In NAP hand calculation , the total possible pairs equals the number of data points in phase A times phase B. The points assigned for overlap are then subtracted from the total possible pairs . This effect size is a probability score . The total possible pairs is the denominator , and the overlap subtracted from the total possible pairs is the numerator in the probability calculation . Normally NAP effect sizes range from .5 to 1 , where .5 indicates that data points in baseline and treatment are equal , while 1 indicates that no data points overlap . Parker and Vannest ( 2009 ) suggest that NAP lower than .65 be medium effects , and above .93 be interpreted as strong effects . In this current study , the total possible pairs included four traditional data points multiplied by four RR data points , leading to 16 total possible pairs ( i.e. , 44 = 16 ) for each participant . # Oral reading fluency . Additionally , ORF was measured in order to determine if momentum effects improved reading rate across paragraphs . The ORF variable was defined as words read correctly per minute ( WCPM ) and was assessed on each paragraph of each selection . In addition , we documented ORF over the first 10 words of novel paragraphs in the intervention condition in order to document possible momentum-like effects within paragraphs . This measure was used in Vostal and Lee ( 2011 ) to determine how ORF at beginning parts of paragraphs read immediately after a high-p sequence compared with the end of those paragraphs ; and its documentation in the current study makes results directly comparable . Previous research ( e.g. , Lee at al. , 2006 ) has demonstrated that much like physical momentum , behavioral environment , such as those presented during a novel paragraph , occur . # Data Collection # All sessions were video recorded using iMovie software and a built-in camera on an Apple MacBook computer . Files were converted to digital videos with audio files , and then saved to DVD . Sessions were scored from original files , using the time-stamped counter and visual audio wave viewable through iMovie . The audio wave allowed for precise measurement of the point at which a participant initiated and subsequently completed reading each paragraph . Using the time-stamped videos , the amount of time to read a paragraph was measured using the running counter on the file , and correct/incorrect words read were marked on a copy of the passage . WCPM was calculated by taking the total number of words read correctly in each paragraph or group of 10 words ( i.e. , in the initial portions of novel paragraphs after repeated paragraphs ) , multiplying by 60 , and dividing by the total time to read the section . The video files were used for primary scoring and for inter-observer agreement . observer collected inter-observer agreement ( IOA ) on 50% of the sessions . Four sessions for each participant were randomly selected with the rule that at least two of the sessions had to come from the intervention condition . The secondary observer viewed the video files on the same computer used for primary scoring and scored all dependent variables using the time-stamped counter and audio wave on the file . For the latency measure , an agreement was scored if the second observer 's score was within .5 s of the primary observation ( i.e. , a threshold more strict as that used in previously published studies of momentum-like effects ; Lee et al. , 2004 ; 2006 ) . The interval ( i.e. , point-by-point ) agreement method ( Kennedy , 2005 ) was used to calculate IOA , where the number of agreements was divided by the number of agreements and disagreements . Latency agreement was 100% ; this high level of agreement is attributable to the fact that videos could be slowed down and replayed , and the audio wave imprinted on the video made it clear when ORF measure was assessed on the same 50% of sessions using the total agreement method ( Kennedy , 2005 ) . The smaller WCPM was divided by the larger WCPM and multiplied by 100 . Total agreement for WCPM was 100% for Craig and 98% ( range 95%-100% ) for Jerry . Agreement for the retell measure was assessed on 50% of sessions using the total agreement method , and was calculated in the same manner as the ORF measure . Total agreement for retell was 94% ( range 88%-98% ) for Craig and 96% ( range 91%-100% ) for Jerry . # Procedural Integrity . Another observer assessed procedural integrity through the use of a checklist of procedures ( e.g. , researcher welcomed participant , researcher asked participant to read as quickly as possible , researcher pronounced incorrect words and participant repeated those words after each reading in RR condition ) on 37% ( n = 3 ) of the sessions for each participant . Procedural integrity was 100%. # Results # Latency # For Jerry , mean latency to initiate novel ( i.e. , unpracticed ) paragraphs during intervention mean latency to initiate traditional paragraphs was 8.98 s ( SD = 1.04 ) , indicating that he initiated novel paragraphs 59% faster after the RR oral reading fluency intervention than in the traditional condition ( see Fig. 1 ) . Visual inspection of Jerry 's data indicated that , while there was some variability across selections , latencies were shorter during the intervention condition compared to all selections in the traditional condition . Overlap analysis using the NAP effect size calculation resulted in probability of non-overlap of 1 , indicating a strong effect for Jerry on latency to initiate novel paragraphs during intervention compared to the traditional condition . # Craig 's mean latency to initiate novel paragraphs during intervention was 5.21 s ( SD = 1.74 ) , while mean latency to initiate traditional paragraphs was 8.92 s ( SD = 1.12 ) , indicating that he initiated novel paragraphs 42% faster after the oral reading fluency intervention than in the traditional condition . Visual inspection of Craig 's data indicated that , while there was variability across selections and the difference between data points across conditions was sometimes the traditional condition . Overlap analysis using the NAP effect size calculation resulted in probability of non-overlap of 1 , indicating a strong effect for Craig on latency to initiate novel paragraphs during intervention compared to the traditional condition . # Fluency # Table 1 presents mean WCPM across selections in each condition for the two participants . In addition to showing fluency across paragraphs in the traditional condition , fluency is shown in three ways for the intervention condition : ( a ) for the repeated paragraphs , ( b ) the first 10 words of novel paragraphs read immediately after a repeated paragraph , and ( c ) the average fluency across total novel paragraphs . This data display is the same as that used in Vostal and Lee ( 2011 ) , thus furthering the systematic replication of that study . Each participant read the repeated paragraphs with greater fluency than he read the paragraphs in the traditional condition ( see Table 1 ) , suggesting that the RR intervention produced the expected effect of increased ORF . Additionally , when fluency was measured on novel paragraphs during traditional condition , suggesting it was the RR intervention that produced the fluency increases on those targeted paragraphs . # Mean WCPM in the first 10 words of novel paragraphs read immediately following a repeated paragraph was greater for each participant than his mean WCPM on the traditional paragraphs . It approached WCPM of repeated paragraphs , though standard deviations were also greater . These results suggested that , on average , the fluency momentum generated through the RR intervention on repeated paragraphs carried over to the initial segment of novel paragraphs , before the momentum was expended as participants continued reading those novel paragraphs . Across all passages in intervention , Jerry initiated novel paragraphs after repeated paragraphs at 82.0 WCPM , before slowing to 69.6 WCPM . Similarly , Craig initiated novel paragraphs after repeated paragraphs at 102.5 WCPM , before slowing to 95.9 WCPM. # Discussion # The theory of behavioral momentum attempts to explain behavioral persistence during changes in environmental conditions , such as common disruptions to responding in classrooms ( Perry-Cruwys et al. , 2011 ) . High-p sequences have been developed in order to increase Lee 2006 ; Mace et al . 1988 ) . Usually , high-p sequences insert a series of easier discrete tasks before instructional-level tasks in order to establish momentum effects , allowing students to contact reinforcement more efficiently ( Burns et al. , 2009 ) . In continuous reading , however , such discrete reinforcers may not be salient . # The current study replicated the results found in Vostal and Lee ( 2011 ) in which increases in oral reading fluency resulted in reduced latency between paragraphs during continuous reading . In the present study , we used RR as an antecedent intervention to increase response rate in a manner consistent with high-p sequences during a continuous reading task and found that similar results . While results should be interpreted conservatively , they answered our two research questions . The first question asked if RR would lead to latency reductions between paragraphs in a manner indicative of behavioral momentum-like effects in free operant tasks . Across both students , mean latencies between paragraphs were lower during intervention than in the traditional conditions ( see Figure 1 ) , and overlap . The second question asked if RR would lead to fluency increases that carried over to novel paragraphs , providing further evidence of momentum-like effects . Across both students , fluency was greater after RR and appeared to establish momentum-like effects that carried over into initial portions of novel paragraphs ( see Table 1 ) . Results from the current study offer initial evidence that fluency building may be used on targeted paragraphs within larger passages to create similar momentum-like effects . Fluency-building techniques may reduce response effort for reading targeted paragraphs within passages of constant difficulty to produce momentum-like effects on students ' latency to re-initiate reading after common disruptions ( i.e. , turning the page , reading more difficult material ) . # The within-passage latency results found during this study are congruent with other studies of behavioral momentum in free operant academic tasks ( Lee et al. , 2006 ; Vostal &amp; Lee , 2011 ) . The momentum-like effects established through RR appear to have been expended as participants read through novel paragraphs ( i.e. , their ORF lowered ) and increased after a subsequent high-p passage suggested that the detection of within task differences ( i.e. , expenditure ) offers evidence of the presence of behavioral momentum-like effects . That is , if an antecedent intervention ( i.e. , a high-p task ) built momentum , then that momentum should be expended as students work through a targeted , lower probability task . Based on the reductions in ORF through novel paragraphs for participants in the current study , these results align with previous findings ( e.g. , Lee at al. , 2006 ) . Therefore , the procedures used in the current study appear to have isolated the behavioral mechanism in the same way that previous studies have , indicating that results presented in this current study can be attributed to behavioral momentum . # Perhaps the most important implication of this study for teachers of students with EBD is that it demonstrates yet another application of the high-p sequence intervention . High-p sequences have been found to produce positive results in academic tasks ( e.g. , Burns et al. , 2009 ; Lee et al. , 2006 ) and in classroom behavior ( e.g. , 2012 , Wehby &amp; Hollohan , 2000 ) . Extant research suggests that an intervention grounded in the theory of behavioral momentum , such as the high-p sequence , has generalizability to a variety of tasks . The current study supports and extends the theoretical implications of previous research by suggesting that previously validated fluency-building techniques may be used to establish momentum-like effects that impact students ' task engagement . Teachers may be able to use the basic structure of the high-p sequence ( i.e. , presenting more preferred tasks to students with EBD immediately before less preferred tasks ) as a positive behavior support in multiple contexts . Because the theory of behavioral momentum explains persistence across contexts , results from the current study , in combination with the body of evidence supporting the high-p sequence intervention , offer insight into a fundamental behavioral mechanism from which further intervention packages can be developed that may affect task engagement for students with EBD . Developing replicable interventions that improve task engagement behaviors for students with EBD will likely be important for their effective academic instruction ( i.e. , McDaniel et al. # Limitations and Future Research # Results of the current study should be interpreted in light of its limitations . The primary limitation of this current study stems from the number of replications for each participant . Kennedy ( 2005 ) notes that a benefit of multielement designs is that they allow researchers to analyze experimental conditions using a single participant , and that as long as response differentiation occurs across at least one condition , " then experimental control can be readily demonstrated " ( p. 149 ) . Therefore , the fact that this study demonstrated similar results across two participants offers evidence that the intervention demonstrated a functional relation . But , the fact that there were only four sessions in each condition for each participant remains a limitation . As outlined in the What Works Clearinghouse single-case designs technical documentation guide , Kratchowil et al . ( 2010 ) indicated that an alternating treatment design ( i.e. , multielement design ) should have five repetitions of the alternating sequence to meet standards , while a design with four repetitions would meet standards with reservations . As such conservatively . Future research needs to examine effects with additional repetitions of the alternating sequence . # A second limitation of this study stems from the use of a readability formula to determine text difficulty . Several studies ( e.g. , Ardoin et al . 2005 ; Christ and Ardoin 2009 ; Poncy et al . 2005 ) have demonstrated that readability formulas do not adequately predict ORF . It is impossible to know whether some of the ORF variability documented across conditions was related to the readability formula used . Participants ' fluency on selections in the traditional condition and novel paragraphs in the intervention condition were similar , suggesting that the readability formula described internally valid differences in text difficulty . Moreover , these reading selections were part of a previous study ( Vostal &amp; Lee , 2011 ) in which their readability was manipulated , and that the same passages were used in the current study make results directly comparable with that previous research . Nevertheless , future research should examine similar momentum-like effects using reading selections that are either taken directly from published leveled reading series ( ) or using a method used in Treptow et al . ( 2007 ) , where they determined individual participants ' frustration , instructional , and independent reading levels based on ratios of known and unknown words within reading selections . # In addition to these limitations , the specific procedures employed in this study create a practical limitation because they might be difficult to replicate in classrooms . Using RR on only a portion of the text that participants read was done to correspond with previous examinations of behavioral momentum in free operant tasks ( i.e. , Belfiore et al. , 1998 ; Lee et al. , 2004 ; 2006 ; Vostal &amp; Lee , 2011 ) . In the continuous reading task in this study , movement between paragraphs of increased ORF and paragraphs of decreased ORF demonstrated effects that were similar to those established in high-p sequences of discrete tasks , and isolated those effects in terms of behavioral momentum . That is , across session results showed that as average fluency increased , average latencies between paragraphs decreased , average fluency remained elevated on novel paragraphs and the cycle of momentum building and expenditure to develop in the same ways that has been shown in previous studies using high-p sequences ( e.g. , Lee et al. , 2006 ) . Certainly , research into fundamental behavioral processes informs researchers ' understanding of behavior in any applied context ( Lee , 2006 ) , and should lead to future intervention development ( Skinner , 2002 ) . But , the procedures that allowed for the isolation of the behavioral process examined in this study ( i.e. , behavioral momentum ) may not be easily translated into a " classroom-ready " intervention . Future research could address this limitation . # In addition to limitations , results from this study suggest additional possibilities for future research . In this study , results indicated that fluency increases carried over into the initial portions of novel paragraphs , but that increases expended across entire paragraphs . Future research should examine how the reading momentum is expended . Does ORF decline abruptly when students encounter unrecognizable words or punctuation marks or is there a more gradual decline in fluency in keeping with a of behavioral momentum suggests that some behaviors persist longer than others in the face of changing environmental conditions . Future research could examine effects of fluency-building techniques on engagement in subsequent tasks . Such effects could be explained by behavioral momentum theory . While the current study isolated momentum effects during oral reading within passages , it did not attempt to isolate these effects after passages . Similarly , future research could measure overall persistence in a single task following the introduction of a fluency-building component , as measured through cumulative task persistence when there is no teacher-directed termination of task requirements . This overall persistence could possibly be measured across different behaviors when common disruptors interrupt responding . Studies of this sort could have more direct implications for increasing academic task engagement in classroom settings for students with EBD . More research is needed to understand these implications . # The results of this present study contribute to the growing body of research examining interventions based on the theory of behavioral momentum . This current study offers evidence that reading fluency interventions can lead to momentum-like effects in continuous reading beyond those traditionally measured in reading fluency studies . That is , fluency might be pinpointed as the integral component in academic interventions based on behavioral momentum that simultaneously help students initiate and remain engaged in reading tasks , as well as improve their reading . # Table 1 Mean words correct per minute ( standard deviations ) read across traditional and intervention passages # Note : RR = Repeated Reading Paragraphs , NP = Novel Paragraphs # References Ardoin , S. P. , Martens , B. K. , &amp; Wolfe , L. A. ( 1999 ) . Using high-probability instruction sequences with fading to increase student compliance during transitions . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis , 32 , 339-351. **28;2371;TOOLONG # Axelrod , M. I. , &amp; Zank , A. J. ( 2012 ) . Increasing classroom compliance : Using a high-probability command sequence aith noncompliant students . Journal of Behavioral Education , 21 , 119-133. **29;2401;TOOLONG # Belfiore , P. J. , Lee , D. L. , Scheeler , M. C. , &amp; Klein , D. ( 2002 ) . Implications of behavioral momentum and academic achievement for students . Psychology in the Schools , 39 , 171-179. doi:10.1002/pits.10028 # Belfiore , P. J. , Lee , D. L. , Vargas , A. U. , &amp; Skinner , C. H. ( 1997 ) . Effects of high-preferencc single-digit mathematics problem completion on multiple-digit mathematics problem performance . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis , 30 , 327-330. **28;2432;TOOLONG # Burns , M. K. , Ardoin , S. P. , Parker , D. C. , Hodgson , J. , Klingbeil , D. A. , &amp; Scholin , S. E. ( 2009 ) . Interspersal technique and behavioral momentum for reading word lists . School Psychology Review , 38 , 428-434. # Cullinan , D. , Osborne , S. , &amp; Epstein , M. ( 2004 ) . Characteristics of emotional disturbance among female students . Remedial and Special Education , 25 , 276-290. **32;2462;TOOLONG # Fuchs , L. S. , Fuchs , D. , &amp; Maxwell , L. ( 1998 ) . The validity of informal reading comprehension measures . Remedial and Special Education , 9 , 20-28. doi : **26;2496;TOOLONG # Good , R. H. , &amp; Kaminski , R. A. of Basic Early Literacy Skills ( 6thed . ) . Eugene , OR : Institute for the Development of Educational Achievement . Available from http : //dibels.uoregon.edu/ # Hosp , M. K. , &amp; Hosp , J. L. ( 2003 ) . Curriculum-based measurement for reading spelling , and math : How to do it and why . Preventing School Failure , 48 , 10-17. # Joseph , L. M. , &amp; Nist , L. M. ( 2006 ) . Comparing the effects of unknown-known ratios on word reading learning versus learning rates . Journal of Behavioral Education , 15 , 69-79. **29;2524;TOOLONG # Kennedy , C. H. , ( 2005 ) . Single-case designs for educational research . Boston , MA : Allyn and Bacon . # Kratochwill , T. R. , Hitchcock , J. , Horner , R. H. , Levin , J. R. , Odom , S. L. , Rindskopf , D. M &amp; Shadish , W. R. ( 2010 ) . Single-case designs technical documentation . Retrieved from What Works Clearinghouse website : http : **39;2555;TOOLONG # Lane , K. L. , &amp; Menzies , H. M. with and at risk for emotional and behavioral disorders : An introduction . Behavior Disorders , 35 , 82-85. # Lee , D. L. ( 2006 ) . Facilitating transitions between and within academic tasks : An application of behavioral momentum . Remedial and Special Education , 27 , 312-317. **32;2596;TOOLONG # Lee , D. L. , Belfiore , P. J. , Ferko , D. , Hua , Y. , Carranza , M. , &amp; Hildebrand , K. ( 2006 ) . Using pre and post low-p latency to assess behavioral momentum : A preliminary investigation . Journal of Behavioral Education , 15 , 203-214. **29;2630;TOOLONG # Lee , D. L. , Belfiore , P. J. , Scheeler , M. C. , Hua , Y. , &amp; Smith , R. ( 2004 ) . Behavioral momentum in academics : Using embedded high-p sequences to increase academic productivity . Psychology in the Schools , 41 , 789-801. doi:10.1002/pits.20014 # Lee , D. L. , &amp; Lapse , A. K. ( 2003 ) . Using high-probability request sequences to increase journal writing . Journal of Behavioral Education , 12 , 261-273. doi : J. , Vostal , B. R. , &amp; Hua , Y. ( 2012 ) . The effects of high-preference problems on the completion of non-preferred mathematics problems . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis , 45 , 223-228. # Mace , F. C. , Hock , M. L. , Lalli , J. S. , West , B. J. , Belfiore , P. , Pinter , E. , &amp; Brown , D. K. ( 1988 ) . Behavioral momentum and the treatment of noncompliance . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis , 21 , 123-141. doi : 10.1901/jaba.1988.21-123 # McDaniel , S. C. , Duchaine , E. L. , &amp; Jolivette , K. ( 2010 ) . Struggling readers with emotional and behavioral disorders and their teachers : Perceptions of corrective reading . Education and Treatment of Children , 33 , 585-599. # National Reading Panel . ( 2000 ) . Teaching children to read : An evidence-based assessment of the scientific research literature on reading and its implications for reading instruction . Washington , DC : National Institute of Child Health and Human Development . # Nevin , J. A. , Mandell , . The analysis of behavioral momentum . Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior , 39 , 49-59. **27;2661;TOOLONG # Parker , R. I. , &amp; Vannest , K. ( 2009 ) . An improved effect size for single-case research : Nonoverlap of all pairs . Behavior Therapy , 40 , 357-367. # Parry-Cruwys , D. E. , Neal , C. M. , Ahearn , W. H. , Wheeler , E. E. , Premchander , R. , et al . ( 2011 ) . Resistance to disruption in a classroom setting . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis , 44 , 363-367. doi : 10.1901/jaba.2011.44-363 # Samuels , S. J. , &amp; Farstrup , A. E. ( Eds. ) . ( 2006 ) . What the research has to say about fluency instruction . Newark , DE : International Reading Association . # Skinner , C. H. ( 2002 ) . An empirical analysis of interspersal research evidence , implications , and applications of the discrete task completion hypothesis . Journal of School Psychology , 40 , 347-368. **33;2690;TOOLONG # Spargo , ( 1989 ) . Timed readings ( 3rd ed . Staubitz , J. E. , Cartledge , G. , Yurick , A. L. , &amp; Lo , Y. Y. ( 2005 ) . Repeated reading for students with emotional or behavioral disorders : Peer- and trainer-mediated instruction . Behavioral Disorders , 31 , 51-64. # Sutherland , K. S. , Lewis-Palmer , T. , Stichter , J. , &amp; Morgan , P. L. ( 2008 ) . Examining the influence of teacher behavior and classroom context on the behavioral and academic outcomes for students with emotional or behavioral disorders . Journal of Special Education , 41 , 223-233. # Sutherland , K. S. , &amp; Singh , N. N. ( 2004 ) . Learned helplessness and students with emotional or behavioral disorders : Deprivations in the classroom . Behavioral Disorders , 29 , 169-120. # Teeple , D. H. , &amp; Skinner , C. H. ( 2004 ) . Enhancing grammar assignment perceptions by increasing assignment demands : Extending additive inter-spersal research to students with emotional and behavioral disorders . Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders , 12 , 120-127. # Therrien , W. J. ( 2004 ) . Fluency and meta-analysis . Remedial and Special Education , 25 , 252-261. # Therrien , W. J. , &amp; Kubina , R. M. ( 2006 ) . Developing reading fluency with repeated reading . Intervention in School and Clinic , 41 , 156-160. # Treptow , M. A. , Burns , M. K. , &amp; McComas , J. J. ( 2007 ) . Reading at the frustration , instructional , and independent levels : The effects on students ' reading comprehension and time on task . School Psychology Review , 36 , 159-166. # Vostal , B. R. , &amp; Lee , D. L. ( 2011 ) . Behavioral momentum during a continuous reading task : An exploratory study . Journal of Behavioral Education , 20 , 163-181. doi : **25;2725;TOOLONG # Wagner , M. , Kutash , K. , Duchnowski , A. J. , Epstein , M. H. , &amp; Sumi , W. C. ( 2005 ) . The children and youth we serve : A national picture of the characteristics of students with emotional disturbance receiving special education services . Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders , 13 , 79-96. # ( 2000 ) . Effects of high-probability requests on the latency to initiate academic tasks . Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis , 33 , 259-262. doi : 10.1901/jaba.2000.33-259 # Wehby , J. H. , Lane , K. L. , &amp; Falk , K. B. ( 2003 ) . Academic instruction for students with emotional and behavioral disorders . Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders , 11 , 194-197. # Wexler , J. , Vaughn , S. , Edmonds , M. , Reutebuch , C. K. ( 2008 ) . A synthesis of fluency interventions for secondary struggling readers . Reading &amp; Writing , 21 , 317-347. **30;2752;TOOLONG # GRAPH : Figure 1 : Mean latency to initiate novel paragraphs during the repeated reading and the traditional conditions across reading selections for Jerry and Craig . #