ARE AMERICANS becoming- as Time magazine ( August 30 ) suggests- Islamophobic ? According to one recent poll , 46 percent of us believe that Islam is more likely than other faiths to inspire violence against nonbelievers , and 34 percent of us do n't want a mosque in our neighborhood . According to an August 19 Washington Post poll , 30 percent of conservative Republicans who dislike Obama claim that he is a Muslim . ( A Time poll put it at 46 percent . ) Is " Muslim " the new political slur ? I travel to the Middle East at least once each year , often visiting multiple countries . I belong to an evangelicalMuslim discussion group which meets annually , and the participants include pious , brilliant , generous Muslim scholars whom I count as my friends . When a topic like " Islamophobic America " comes up , I share intense personal e-mails with them . But I came away from my trip to the Middle East this past summer with some new concerns . In August 1 spoke to a group of the West . Some were progressive and thoughtful , others less so . A dialogue between two young men ran like this : " We pity you Christians , " " Why ? " " Because what Christianity teaches is wrong . " " But what do we do if some Christians say that Islam is wrong ? " " Then they are wrong . " " But two people might both claim to be right . We have to ask : can we live together and accept each other or will we destroy each other ? " " If something is wrong it must be stopped . " " So what do you propose we do to people who do n't believe in Islam ? " " Eventually people who teach wrong things should be arrested . " Before I had a chance to unleash my own broadside , half of the room erupted in argument The Arabic flew so fast and furious my translator could barely keep up . " You ca n't possibly mean that ! " " What you say is not Islam ! " " What that the target of this barrage was not persuaded . His eyes narrowed . He slouched and went silent . When the session ended , a circle of five women students cornered him for more punishing debate . I expect to find this rigid position among those who are not educated . For instance , when I took a taxi home from Chicago 's O'Hare airport recently , I had a conversation with my Pakistani driver . He spoke first : " Where have you been ? " " The Middle East . " " I wish I lived in a Muslim country . " " Is it hard to live here in Chicago ? " " Yes . Too much wickedness . " " What 's an example ? " " Bikinis . " " Anything else ? " " People do n't follow Islam . " " But maybe they believe in something else , " " They 're wrong . " " What should we do with people that disagree with Islam ? " " They should be punished . " But to encounter this perspective in a dashed off an e-mail to a friend , a Muslim scholar in Canada . He wrote back : " The reality is that Muslims , like members of any faith community , have a wide spectrum of backgrounds , influences , mentalities and other things that define a religious human being . " I knew that , but I needed a reminder-a reminder that every religion has people who represent only one place in the religious spectrum . And you ca n't judge a religion by a few extremists . During the week of my return to the States , the furor over the mosque planned in New York was filling the headlines Involved in the mosque project are progressive Muslims led by Imam Feisal Abdul Rauf and Daisy Khan , executive director of the American Society for Muslim Advancement . They are Sufis ( think mystical Muslim Mennonites perhaps ) who are working with Jewish leaders to build a community center modeled after the Jewish Community Center in Manhattan . The attacks of 9/11 were deeply troubling to them , and they wanted to do something good in response . the same religious slogans I 'd heard in the Middle East from the Muslim side . Through these experiences and my conversations with Muslims , three ideas have become clearer to me . First , the rise of Islamic fundamentalism and intolerance may have more to do with cultural resistance against the West than with religion per se . Religion is often used as a tool to express dislike of " the other . " I doubt that when the Taliban killed medical workers in Afghanistan this past summer they were doing it because the Westerners were missionaries The Taliban saw them as a projection of Western and American influence , and this was their barbaric way of fighting back . These Taliban have as much in common with Islam as the ICKK has in common with Christianity . Muslim scholars have told me that in their view religious violence is a characteristic of postcolonial societies People seek ways to express resistance . Sadly , many do it violently . And they use religion in doing so . Second , like Christianity , Islam is deeply variegated . It includes fundamentalists who have chosen to live alongside others peacefully . I have Muslim friends in Toronto , Amman and Beirut who would find the Muslim faith of parts of rural west Pakistan alarming . In discussions with Muslim scholars , I 've sometimes asked what to do with Qur'anic verses describing the conquering of nonbelievers . They open my Bible to the book of Joshua and pose the same question to me : " Do these texts still define how you treat nonbelievers ? " Touch . Third , tolerance and diversity are two of the good gifts the West has given the world . ( Not that we in the West embrace these gifts faithfully ourselves ; think of the history of Serbia , Ireland or Selma . ) I yearn to hear my Muslim friends speak up for tolerance for Christians living in Muslim countries . Privately , Middle Eastern Christians will confide that they face enormous struggles in trying to build a church or school- or just in avoiding employment discrimination . But few Arab Christians will discuss these problems openly . When will Christians in the Muslim world ? I am not hopeful that my Pakistani taxi driver in Chicago or narrowly educated fundamentalist students in the Middle East will appreciate these concerns They probably think that tolerant , progressive Muslims have lost the true faith . But I remember that circle of five young Muslim women- all proudly wearing the hijab- who confronted that angry young man who saw no way for people of different faiths to live together . They understood what must be done to advance this conversation , and they understood who had to do it .